[WIP] Added Threaded I/O topic (#1408)
redis/redis-doc: topics/threaded-io.md

# Threaded I/O
## Introduction

> In order to keep it simple and reliable, Redis is mostly single-threaded. The implementation of parallel query execution might set an entry barrier for every new feature. However, there are certain threaded operations such as UNLINK, slow I/O accesses and other things that are performed on side threads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Redis is implemented as mostly single-threaded application in order to keep it simple and reliable. There are certain threaded operations such as UNLINK, slow I/O accesses and other operations that are performed on side threads that are coordinated by the main thread.
```

> Now it is also possible to handle Redis clients' socket reads and writes in different I/O threads. Since especially writing is so slow, normally Redis users use pipelining in order to speed up the Redis performances per core, and spawn multiple instances in order to scale more. Using I/O threads it is possible to easily speedup two times Redis without resorting to pipelining nor sharding of the instance.

Reviewer: Starting with Redis 6.0 and great, it is now possible*

## Configuration
We have two options to control how I/O threads perform.
```

> io-threads 4

Reviewer 2: should we change the 4 by a placeholder <n threads>?

```
The `io-threads` option control how many threads you want to use on reading/writing client connections.
- 1 or not configured: Use single thread like what we have in the older version.
- n (n >= 2): Use n threads(1 main thread & n-1 I/O threads) to handle network reads/writes.

```

> io-threads-do-reads yes

Reviewer 2: same as above. replace yes with [yes|no] ?

> io-threads-do-reads [yes|no]

Reviewer: I would punt the configuration to the end or interleave the configuration with the introduction of the topics. io-threads-do-reads is hard to understand without context.

```
By default, Redis uses I/O threads on the write system call only. If you want to use it on the read  system call, you have to enable this option as well. Usually, threaded reads don't help much.

## High-Level Architecture

> The main idea of this feature is to postpone the read and write action and accumulate those events to the next event loop cycle. So that we have multiple events waiting to be handled and use I/O threads to deal with them.

Reviewer: I didn't follow this sentence. The high level idea is that IO operations can be done in parallel by making the networking primitives for reading and writing to a client thread safe. So we split the work into identifying the clients with pending operations and then we fan out threads to do it.

For the reading action, when a command/message is sent to the Redis server, it's described as a file event, which will trigger Redis to read from the client connection directly. After that, Redis continues to decode/analyze/execute the command/message and get the result, added it to the write pending list as we discussed above, and handles the next happened event until no more available file event or time event happened. So in this case, the `io-threads-do-reads` option allows you to stop reading client connections when the event arrived, collect them to a **pending list** as well, and postpone the read action to the next cycle period using multiple I/O threads. When reads are done, Redis use the main thread to execute the client command one by one.

I/O threads are only activated when the main thread gets the read/write pending list prepared. The workflow can be described as below:

1. main thread prepare the pending list for read
2. I/O threads read from the connections parallelly
3. main thread executes command one by one
4. main thread prepare the pending list for write
5. I/O threads write reply content to the connections parallelly

## Low-Level Design

> ### Where is the pending list

Reviewer: My take is that this section is way too detailed. Someone will probably just go read the code if they want to understand this low level of detail. I think if you remove all of the specific implementation details (names of the arguments, functions, etc), and just leave what the algorithm looks like, it will probably be 50% shorter and just as readable.

I would also say you maybe should fold the high-level/low-level design together and just describe the write flow and then the read flow. Although they have some similarities, and you were trying to generalize, they end up being pretty different.

# Threaded I/O

> ## Introduction

Reviewer 2: Should we mention why is threading avoided in Redis ( simplicity among others .... )

Author: Added a few desc about this:
- simple and reliable
- entry barrier for every new feature

Redis is mostly single-threaded, however there are certain threaded operations such as UNLINK, slow I/O accesses and other things that are performed on side threads.

Now it is also possible to handle Redis clients' socket reads and writes in different I/O threads. Since especially writing is so slow, normally Redis users use pipelining in order to speed up the Redis performances per core, and spawn multiple instances in order to scale more. Using I/O threads it is possible to easily speedup two times Redis without resorting to pipelining nor sharding of the instance.

## Configuration
We have two options to control how I/O threads perform.
```
io-threads 4
```
The `io-threads` option control how many threads you want to use on reading/writing client connections.
- 1 or not configured: Use single thread like what we have in the older version.
- n (n >= 2): Use n threads(1 main thread & n-1 I/O threads) to handle network reads/writes.

```
io-threads-do-reads yes
```

> By default, Redis uses I/O threads on the writing process only. If you want to use it on the reading process, you have to enable this option as well. Usually, threaded reads don't help much.

Reviewer 2: should we avoid the double meaning of the word process?

Author: Replaced `process` with other words

```
io_threads_list
+---------------+------------+------------+------------+
|   thread 0    |  thread 1  |  thread 2  |  thread 3  |
| (main thread) |(I/O thread)|(I/O thread)|(I/O thread)|
+---------------+------------+------------+------------+
      \/              \/           \/            \/        
      \/              \/           \/            \/             
      \/              \/           \/            \/        
  +----------+   +----------+  +----------+  +----------+
  | client 0 |   | client 1 |  | client 2 |  | client 3 |
  +----------+   +----------+  +----------+  +----------+
  | client 4 |   | client 5 |  | client 6 |
  +----------+   +----------+  +----------+

```

Each thread can iterate over the clients they should read, do read action, and store the result to `client.querybuf` attribute. The main thread will also handle part of the pending tasks after dispatching. In this example, thread 0, which is the main thread, will read through client 0 and then client 4, thread 1 will handle client 1 and client 5, and so on.

### Blocking and Locking

> There will be a racing condition if the I/O thread keeps monitoring and editing the `io_threads_list[i]` list. So Redis prepared another global variable named `io_threads_pending`. It's a thread number length list and stores an integer value representing the number of the remaining task that thread i should handle. When the main thread finished dispatching task to `io_threads_list`, it set `io_threads_pending[i]` to the actual task count.

Reviewer 2: Should we use this section to describe briefly that the main thread signals the io-threads for pending work by setting an atomic variable `io_threads_pending`, then the threads move from busy-waiting to a stage in which they process the pending writes/reads and during that time the main thread is busy waiting for that work to be done and after that the io-threads are put into a busy-wait state again? I believe that the code analysis is too much for the docs? IMHO it's better to describe what the code does... WDYT?

Author: Actually the codes might be helpful for me. But yes the document should be more concise and easy to understand for all people who read it.

> The I/O threads will stay in a `for (int j = 0; j < 1000000; j++)` loop and checking if `io_threads_pending[id] != 0`. So when the value changed to an positive integer, thread i begin to read/write through the client in `io_threads_list[i]`. Once I/O threads finish their job, they will empty the list in `io_threads_list[i]`, and set `io_threads_pending[i]` to 0.

Reviewer 2: Should we swap the code (`for....`) for it's purpose? example: The I/O threads will busy-wait waiting for work ( writes or reads )?

Author: Replaced those code description

When the Redis server is running under a low workload, it will use a mutex lock to stop the I/O threads from keeping looping and checking the `io_threads_pending[i]` value. Redis inited a list of mutex `io_threads_mutex` during I/O threads' initialization, `io_threads_mutex[i]` representing the mutex lock for the thread i. Before writing to client, Redis will check if `server.clients_pending_write` length is lower than 2 * io_threads_num we've configured. If yes, Redis will stop the I/O threads by executing `pthread_mutex_lock(&io_threads_mutex[i])`. So when the main thread acquired the i-th mutex lock successfully, the corresponding I/O thread will be blocked on acquiring the same mutex lock.

The I/O thread will execute those codes in their `while` loop. So in each loop period, the main thread will have a chance to stop them by locking:
```
...
    while(1)
        ...
        pthread_mutex_lock(&io_threads_mutex[id]);
        pthread_mutex_unlock(&io_threads_mutex[id]);
        ...
...
```

## Limitations

> The I/O threads won't work (won't postpone read/write) when:

Reviewer 2: I/O threading is currently not supported with TLS.

Author: Added `- Server running with TLS.`
